We can’t run the modern world without software. National infrastructures and utilities are controlled by computer-based systems and most electrical products include a
computer and controlling software. Industrial manufacturing and distribution is
completely computerized, as is the financial system. Entertainment, including the
music industry, computer games, and film and television, is software intensive.
Therefore, software engineering is essential for the functioning of national and international societies.
Software systems are abstract and intangible. They are not constrained by the
properties of materials, governed by physical laws, or by manufacturing processes.
This simplifies software engineering, as there are no natural limits to the potential of
software. However, because of the lack of physical constraints, software systems can
quickly become extremely complex, difficult to understand, and expensive to change.
There are many different types of software systems, from simple embedded systems to complex, worldwide information systems. It is pointless to look for universal
notations, methods, or techniques for software engineering because different types
of software require different approaches. Developing an organizational information
system is completely different from developing a controller for a scientific instrument. Neither of these systems has much in common with a graphics-intensive computer game. All of these applications need software engineering; they do not all need
the same software engineering techniques.
There are still many reports of software projects going wrong and ‘software failures’.
Software engineering is criticized as inadequate for modern software development.
However, in my view, many of these so-called software failures are a consequence of
two factors:
1. Increasing demands As new software engineering techniques help us to build
larger, more complex systems, the demands change. Systems have to be built
and delivered more quickly; larger, even more complex systems are required;
systems have to have new capabilities that were previously thought to be impossible. Existing software engineering methods cannot cope and new software
engineering techniques have to be developed to meet new these new demands.
2. Low expectations It is relatively easy to write computer programs without using
software engineering methods and techniques. Many companies have drifted
into software development as their products and services have evolved. They do
not use software engineering methods in their everyday work. Consequently,
their software is often more expensive and less reliable than it should be. We
need better software engineering education and training to address this problem.
Software engineers can be rightly proud of their achievements. Of course we still
have problems developing complex software but, without software engineering, we
would not have explored space, would not have the Internet or modern telecommunications. All forms of travel would be more dangerous and expensive. Software engineering has contributed a great deal and I am convinced that its contributions in the
21st century will be even greater.
1.1 ■ Professional software development 5
History of software engineering
The notion of ‘software engineering’ was first proposed in 1968 at a conference held to discuss what was then
called the ‘software crisis’ (Naur and Randell, 1969). It became clear that individual approaches to program
development did not scale up to large and complex software systems. These were unreliable, cost more than
expected, and were delivered late.
Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, a variety of new software engineering techniques and methods were
developed, such as structured programming, information hiding and object-oriented development. Tools and
standard notations were developed and are now extensively used.
http://www.SoftwareEngineering-9.com/Web/History/
1.1 Professional software development
Lots of people write programs. People in business write spreadsheet programs to
simplify their jobs, scientists and engineers write programs to process their experimental data, and hobbyists write programs for their own interest and enjoyment.
However, the vast majority of software development is a professional activity where
software is developed for specific business purposes, for inclusion in other devices,
or as software products such as information systems, CAD systems, etc. Professional
software, intended for use by someone apart from its developer, is usually developed
by teams rather than individuals. It is maintained and changed throughout its life.
Software engineering is intended to support professional software development,
rather than individual programming. It includes techniques that support program
specification, design, and evolution, none of which are normally relevant for personal software development. To help you to get a broad view of what software engineering is about, I have summarized some frequently asked questions in Figure 1.1.
Many people think that software is simply another word for computer programs.
However, when we are talking about software engineering, software is not just the
programs themselves but also all associated documentation and configuration data
that is required to make these programs operate correctly. A professionally developed software system is often more than a single program. The system usually consists of a number of separate programs and configuration files that are used to set up
these programs. It may include system documentation, which describes the structure
of the system; user documentation, which explains how to use the system, and websites for users to download recent product information.
This is one of the important differences between professional and amateur software development. If you are writing a program for yourself, no one else will use it
and you don’t have to worry about writing program guides, documenting the program design, etc. However, if you are writing software that other people will use and
other engineers will change then you usually have to provide additional information
as well as the code of the program.
6 Chapter 1 ■ Introduction
Question Answer
What is software? Computer programs and associated documentation.
Software products may be developed for a particular
customer or may be developed for a general market.
What are the attributes of good software? Good software should deliver the required
functionality and performance to the user and should
be maintainable, dependable, and usable.
What is software engineering? Software engineering is an engineering discipline that
is concerned with all aspects of software production.
What are the fundamental software engineering
activities?
Software specification, software development,
software validation, and software evolution.
What is the difference between software
engineering and computer science?
Computer science focuses on theory and
fundamentals; software engineering is concerned
with the practicalities of developing and delivering
useful software.
What is the difference between software
engineering and system engineering?
System engineering is concerned with all aspects of
computer-based systems development including
hardware, software, and process engineering. Software
engineering is part of this more general process.
What are the key challenges facing software
engineering?
Coping with increasing diversity, demands for reduced
delivery times, and developing trustworthy software.
What are the costs of software engineering? Roughly 60% of software costs are development
costs; 40% are testing costs. For custom software,
evolution costs often exceed development costs.
What are the best software engineering techniques
and methods?
While all software projects have to be professionally
managed and developed, different techniques are
appropriate for different types of system. For example,
games should always be developed using a series of
prototypes whereas safety critical control systems
require a complete and analyzable specification to be
developed. You can’t, therefore, say that one method
is better than another.
What differences has the Web made to software
engineering?
The Web has led to the availability of software
services and the possibility of developing highly
distributed service-based systems. Web-based
systems development has led to important advances
in programming languages and software reuse.
Software engineers are concerned with developing software products (i.e., software which can be sold to a customer). There are two kinds of software products:
1. Generic products These are stand-alone systems that are produced by a development organization and sold on the open market to any customer who is able to
Figure 1.1 Frequently
asked questions about
software
1.1 ■ Professional software development 7
buy them. Examples of this type of product include software for PCs such as
databases, word processors, drawing packages, and project-management tools.
It also includes so-called vertical applications designed for some specific purpose such as library information systems, accounting systems, or systems for
maintaining dental records.
2. Customized (or bespoke) products These are systems that are commissioned by
a particular customer. A software contractor develops the software especially
for that customer. Examples of this type of software include control systems for
electronic devices, systems written to support a particular business process, and
air traffic control systems.
An important difference between these types of software is that, in generic products,
the organization that develops the software controls the software specification. For custom products, the specification is usually developed and controlled by the organization
that is buying the software. The software developers must work to that specification.
However, the distinction between these system product types is becoming
increasingly blurred. More and more systems are now being built with a generic
product as a base, which is then adapted to suit the requirements of a customer.
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems, such as the SAP system, are the best
examples of this approach. Here, a large and complex system is adapted for a company by incorporating information about business rules and processes, reports
required, and so on.
When we talk about the quality of professional software, we have to take into
account that the software is used and changed by people apart from its developers.
Quality is therefore not just concerned with what the software does. Rather, it has to
include the software’s behavior while it is executing and the structure and organization
of the system programs and associated documentation. This is reflected in so-called
quality or non-functional software attributes. Examples of these attributes are the software’s response time to a user query and the understandability of the program code.
The specific set of attributes that you might expect from a software system obviously depends on its application. Therefore, a banking system must be secure, an
interactive game must be responsive, a telephone switching system must be reliable,
and so on. These can be generalized into the set of attributes shown in Figure 1.2,
which I believe are the essential characteristics of a professional software system.
1.1.1 Software engineering
Software engineering is an engineering discipline that is concerned with all aspects of
software production from the early stages of system specification through to maintaining the system after it has gone into use. In this definition, there are two key phrases:
1. Engineering discipline Engineers make things work. They apply theories, methods, and tools where these are appropriate. However, they use them selectively
8 Chapter 1 ■ Introduction
and always try to discover solutions to problems even when there are no applicable theories and methods. Engineers also recognize that they must work to
organizational and financial constraints so they look for solutions within these
constraints.
2. All aspects of software production Software engineering is not just concerned
with the technical processes of software development. It also includes activities
such as software project management and the development of tools, methods,
and theories to support software production.
Engineering is about getting results of the required quality within the schedule
and budget. This often involves making compromises—engineers cannot be perfectionists. People writing programs for themselves, however, can spend as much time
as they wish on the program development.
In general, software engineers adopt a systematic and organized approach to their
work, as this is often the most effective way to produce high-quality software.
However, engineering is all about selecting the most appropriate method for a set of
circumstances so a more creative, less formal approach to development may be
effective in some circumstances. Less formal development is particularly appropriate for the development of web-based systems, which requires a blend of software
and graphical design skills.
Software engineering is important for two reasons:
1. More and more, individuals and society rely on advanced software systems. We
need to be able to produce reliable and trustworthy systems economically and
quickly.
Product characteristics Description
Maintainability Software should be written in such a way so that it can evolve to
meet the changing needs of customers. This is a critical attribute
because software change is an inevitable requirement of a
changing business environment.
Dependability and security Software dependability includes a range of characteristics
including reliability, security, and safety. Dependable software
should not cause physical or economic damage in the event of
system failure. Malicious users should not be able to access or
damage the system.
Efficiency Software should not make wasteful use of system resources such
as memory and processor cycles. Efficiency therefore includes
responsiveness, processing time, memory utilization, etc.
Acceptability Software must be acceptable to the type of users for which it is
designed. This means that it must be understandable, usable, and
compatible with other systems that they use.
Figure 1.2 Essential
attributes of good
software
1.1 ■ Professional software development 9
2. It is usually cheaper, in the long run, to use software engineering methods and
techniques for software systems rather than just write the programs as if it was a
personal programming project. For most types of systems, the majority of costs
are the costs of changing the software after it has gone into use.
The systematic approach that is used in software engineering is sometimes called
a software process. A software process is a sequence of activities that leads to the
production of a software product. There are four fundamental activities that are common to all software processes. These activities are:
1. Software specification, where customers and engineers define the software that
is to be produced and the constraints on its operation.
2. Software development, where the software is designed and programmed.
3. Software validation, where the software is checked to ensure that it is what the
customer requires.
4. Software evolution, where the software is modified to reflect changing customer
and market requirements.
Different types of systems need different development processes. For example,
real-time software in an aircraft has to be completely specified before development
begins. In e-commerce systems, the specification and the program are usually developed together. Consequently, these generic activities may be organized in different
ways and described at different levels of detail depending on the type of software
being developed. I describe software processes in more detail in Chapter 2.
Software engineering is related to both computer science and systems engineering:
1. Computer science is concerned with the theories and methods that underlie computers and software systems, whereas software engineering is concerned with the
practical problems of producing software. Some knowledge of computer science
is essential for software engineers in the same way that some knowledge of
physics is essential for electrical engineers. Computer science theory, however, is
often most applicable to relatively small programs. Elegant theories of computer
science cannot always be applied to large, complex problems that require a software solution.
2. System engineering is concerned with all aspects of the development and evolution of complex systems where software plays a major role. System engineering is therefore concerned with hardware development, policy and process
design and system deployment, as well as software engineering. System engineers are involved in specifying the system, defining its overall architecture,
and then integrating the different parts to create the finished system. They are
less concerned with the engineering of the system components (hardware,
software, etc.).
10 Chapter 1 ■ Introduction
As I discuss in the next section, there are many different types of software. There is no
universal software engineering method or technique that is applicable for all of these.
However, there are three general issues that affect many different types of software:
1. Heterogeneity Increasingly, systems are required to operate as distributed systems
across networks that include different types of computer and mobile devices. As
well as running on general-purpose computers, software may also have to execute
on mobile phones. You often have to integrate new software with older legacy systems written in different programming languages. The challenge here is to develop
techniques for building dependable software that is flexible enough to cope with
this heterogeneity.
2. Business and social change Business and society are changing incredibly quickly
as emerging economies develop and new technologies become available. They
need to be able to change their existing software and to rapidly develop new software. Many traditional software engineering techniques are time consuming and
delivery of new systems often takes longer than planned. They need to evolve so
that the time required for software to deliver value to its customers is reduced.
3. Security and trust As software is intertwined with all aspects of our lives, it is
essential that we can trust that software. This is especially true for remote software systems accessed through a web page or web service interface. We have to
make sure that malicious users cannot attack our software and that information
security is maintained.
Of course, these are not independent issues. For example, it may be necessary to
make rapid changes to a legacy system to provide it with a web service interface. To
address these challenges we will need new tools and techniques as well as innovative
ways of combining and using existing software engineering methods.
1.1.2 Software engineering diversity
Software engineering is a systematic approach to the production of software that
takes into account practical cost, schedule, and dependability issues, as well as the
needs of software customers and producers. How this systematic approach is actually implemented varies dramatically depending on the organization developing the
software, the type of software, and the people involved in the development process.
There are no universal software engineering methods and techniques that are suitable for all systems and all companies. Rather, a diverse set of software engineering
methods and tools has evolved over the past 50 years.
Perhaps the most significant factor in determining which software engineering
methods and techniques are most important is the type of application that is being
developed. There are many different types of application including:
1. Stand-alone applications These are application systems that run on a local computer, such as a PC. They include all necessary functionality and do not need to
1.1 ■ Professional software development 11
be connected to a network. Examples of such applications are office applications on a PC, CAD programs, photo manipulation software, etc.
2. Interactive transaction-based applications These are applications that execute
on a remote computer and that are accessed by users from their own PCs or
terminals. Obviously, these include web applications such as e-commerce applications where you can interact with a remote system to buy goods and services.
This class of application also includes business systems, where a business
provides access to its systems through a web browser or special-purpose client
program and cloud-based services, such as mail and photo sharing. Interactive
applications often incorporate a large data store that is accessed and updated in
each transaction.
3. Embedded control systems These are software control systems that control and
manage hardware devices. Numerically, there are probably more embedded systems than any other type of system. Examples of embedded systems include the
software in a mobile (cell) phone, software that controls anti-lock braking in a
car, and software in a microwave oven to control the cooking process.
4. Batch processing systems These are business systems that are designed to
process data in large batches. They process large numbers of individual inputs to
create corresponding outputs. Examples of batch systems include periodic
billing systems, such as phone billing systems, and salary payment systems.
5. Entertainment systems These are systems that are primarily for personal use and
which are intended to entertain the user. Most of these systems are games of one
kind or another. The quality of the user interaction offered is the most important
distinguishing characteristic of entertainment systems.
6. Systems for modeling and simulation These are systems that are developed by
scientists and engineers to model physical processes or situations, which
include many, separate, interacting objects. These are often computationally
intensive and require high-performance parallel systems for execution.
7. Data collection systems These are systems that collect data from their environment using a set of sensors and send that data to other systems for processing.
The software has to interact with sensors and often is installed in a hostile environment such as inside an engine or in a remote location.
8. Systems of systems These are systems that are composed of a number of other
software systems. Some of these may be generic software products, such as a
spreadsheet program. Other systems in the assembly may be specially written
for that environment.
Of course, the boundaries between these system types are blurred. If you develop
a game for a mobile (cell) phone, you have to take into account the same constraints
(power, hardware interaction) as the developers of the phone software. Batch processing systems are often used in conjunction with web-based systems. For example,
12 Chapter 1 ■ Introduction
in a company, travel expense claims may be submitted through a web application but
processed in a batch application for monthly payment.
You use different software engineering techniques for each type of system
because the software has quite different characteristics. For example, an embedded
control system in an automobile is safety-critical and is burned into ROM when
installed in the vehicle. It is therefore very expensive to change. Such a system needs
very extensive verification and validation so that the chances of having to recall cars
after sale to fix software problems are minimized. User interaction is minimal (or
perhaps nonexistent) so there is no need to use a development process that relies on
user interface prototyping.
For a web-based system, an approach based on iterative development and delivery
may be appropriate, with the system being composed of reusable components.
However, such an approach may be impractical for a system of systems, where
detailed specifications of the system interactions have to be specified in advance so
that each system can be separately developed.
Nevertheless, there are software engineering fundamentals that apply to all types
of software system:
1. They should be developed using a managed and understood development
process. The organization developing the software should plan the development
process and have clear ideas of what will be produced and when it will be completed. Of course, different processes are used for different types of software.
2. Dependability and performance are important for all types of systems. Software
should behave as expected, without failures and should be available for use
when it is required. It should be safe in its operation and, as far as possible,
should be secure against external attack. The system should perform efficiently
and should not waste resources.
3. Understanding and managing the software specification and requirements (what
the software should do) are important. You have to know what different customers
and users of the system expect from it and you have to manage their expectations
so that a useful system can be delivered within budget and to schedule.
4. You should make as effective use as possible of existing resources. This means
that, where appropriate, you should reuse software that has already been developed rather than write new software.
These fundamental notions of process, dependability, requirements, management,
and reuse are important themes of this book. Different methods reflect them in different ways but they underlie all professional software development.
You should notice that these fundamentals do not cover implementation and programming. I don’t cover specific programming techniques in this book because these
vary dramatically from one type of system to another. For example, a scripting language such as Ruby is used for web-based system programming but would be completely inappropriate for embedded systems engineering.
1.1 ■ Professional software development 13
1.1.3 Software engineering and the Web
The development of the World Wide Web has had a profound effect on all of our
lives. Initially, the Web was primarily a universally accessible information store and
it had little effect on software systems. These systems ran on local computers and
were only accessible from within an organization. Around 2000, the Web started to
evolve and more and more functionality was added to browsers. This meant that
web-based systems could be developed where, instead of a special-purpose user
interface, these systems could be accessed using a web browser. This led to the
development of a vast range of new system products that delivered innovative services, accessed over the Web. These are often funded by adverts that are displayed on
the user’s screen and do not involve direct payment from users.
As well as these system products, the development of web browsers that could
run small programs and do some local processing led to an evolution in business and
organizational software. Instead of writing software and deploying it on users’ PCs,
the software was deployed on a web server. This made it much cheaper to change
and upgrade the software, as there was no need to install the software on every PC. It
also reduced costs, as user interface development is particularly expensive.
Consequently, wherever it has been possible to do so, many businesses have moved
to web-based interaction with company software systems.
The next stage in the development of web-based systems was the notion of web
services. Web services are software components that deliver specific, useful functionality and which are accessed over the Web. Applications are constructed by integrating
these web services, which may be provided by different companies. In principle, this
linking can be dynamic so that an application may use different web services each time
that it is executed. I cover this approach to software development in Chapter 19.
In the last few years, the notion of ‘software as a service’ has been developed. It
has been proposed that software will not normally run on local computers but will
run on ‘computing clouds’ that are accessed over the Internet. If you use a service
such as web-based mail, you are using a cloud-based system. A computing cloud is
a huge number of linked computer systems that is shared by many users. Users do
not buy software but pay according to how much the software is used or are given
free access in return for watching adverts that are displayed on their screen.
The advent of the web, therefore, has led to a significant change in the way that
business software is organized. Before the web, business applications were mostly
monolithic, single programs running on single computers or computer clusters.
Communications were local, within an organization. Now, software is highly distributed, sometimes across the world. Business applications are not programmed from
scratch but involve extensive reuse of components and programs.
This radical change in software organization has, obviously, led to changes in the
ways that web-based systems are engineered. For example:
1. Software reuse has become the dominant approach for constructing web-based
systems. When building these systems, you think about how you can assemble
them from pre-existing software components and systems.
14 Chapter 1 ■ Introduction
2. It is now generally recognized that it is impractical to specify all the requirements for such systems in advance. Web-based systems should be developed
and delivered incrementally.
3. User interfaces are constrained by the capabilities of web browsers. Although
technologies such as AJAX (Holdener, 2008) mean that rich interfaces can be
created within a web browser, these technologies are still difficult to use. Web
forms with local scripting are more commonly used. Application interfaces on
web-based systems are often poorer than the specially designed user interfaces
on PC system products.
The fundamental ideas of software engineering, discussed in the previous section,
apply to web-based software in the same way that they apply to other types of software system. Experience gained with large system development in the 20th century
is still relevant to web-based software.
1.2 Software engineering ethics
Like other engineering disciplines, software engineering is carried out within a
social and legal framework that limits the freedom of people working in that area. As
a software engineer, you must accept that your job involves wider responsibilities
than simply the application of technical skills. You must also behave in an ethical
and morally responsible way if you are to be respected as a professional engineer.
It goes without saying that you should uphold normal standards of honesty and
integrity. You should not use your skills and abilities to behave in a dishonest way or
in a way that will bring disrepute to the software engineering profession. However,
there are areas where standards of acceptable behavior are not bound by laws but by
the more tenuous notion of professional responsibility. Some of these are:
1. Confidentiality You should normally respect the confidentiality of your employers or clients irrespective of whether or not a formal confidentiality agreement
has been signed.
2. Competence You should not misrepresent your level of competence. You should
not knowingly accept work that is outside your competence.
3. Intellectual property rights You should be aware of local laws governing the use
of intellectual property such as patents and copyright. You should be careful to
ensure that the intellectual property of employers and clients is protected.
4. Computer misuse You should not use your technical skills to misuse other
people’s computers. Computer misuse ranges from relatively trivial (game playing
on an employer’s machine, say) to extremely serious (dissemination of viruses or
other malware).
1.2 ■ Software engineering ethics 15
Professional societies and institutions have an important role to play in setting
ethical standards. Organizations such as the ACM, the IEEE (Institute of Electrical
and Electronic Engineers), and the British Computer Society publish a code of
professional conduct or code of ethics. Members of these organizations undertake to
follow that code when they sign up for membership. These codes of conduct are generally concerned with fundamental ethical behavior.
Professional associations, notably the ACM and the IEEE, have cooperated to
produce a joint code of ethics and professional practice. This code exists in both a
short form, shown in Figure 1.3, and a longer form (Gotterbarn et al., 1999) that adds
detail and substance to the shorter version. The rationale behind this code is summarized in the first two paragraphs of the longer form:
Computers have a central and growing role in commerce, industry, government,
medicine, education, entertainment and society at large. Software engineers are
those who contribute by direct participation or by teaching, to the analysis, specification, design, development, certification, maintenance and testing of software